Paper: ArcadeDB in Python: An In-Process Multi-Model Database (#1256)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/taewoon_kim/main.md

---
# Keep this title identical to the one in `myst.yml`
title: "ArcadeDB in Python: An In-Process Multi-Model Database"
abstract: |

>   Scientific Python workflows increasingly mix three kinds of data access: transactional
>   reads and writes over records, traversals over relationships, and similarity search over
>   vector embeddings. In practice these are split across separate systems (a relational or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Scientific Python workflows sometimes mix three kinds of data access: transactional
  reads and writes over records, traversals over relationships, and similarity search over
  vector embeddings. In practice these are split across separate systems (a relational or
```

The claim that workloads that mix these 3 types of queries are "increasingly" used is difficult to substantiate. I don't think the paper's impact would be decreased at all by just saying that such workloads "often" or "sometimes" mix those types of queries.

  bring an embedded, multi-model database into the in-process scientific-Python
  ecosystem. A single `pip install` provides documents, a property graph, and HNSW vector
  search in one process, with no server to deploy. The contribution is not the database
  engine itself (ArcadeDB, a mature Apache-2.0 Java engine, which we credit) but its
  enablement from Python: a JPype binding over a bundled per-platform Java runtime, a
  NumPy/pandas-friendly API, and the in-process workflows this unlocks. We demonstrate this
  with a single hybrid retrieval workflow that combines vector search, SQL filtering, and graph
  traversal over one dataset in one transaction, a composition no single Python-embeddable
  alternative expresses today. We also characterize the embedded-from-Python experience against
  specialist embedded peers (SQLite, DuckDB, LadybugDB, Chroma), including its costs.
---

## Introduction

A growing share of scientific and applied machine-learning work is data-shaped in three
different ways at once. A retrieval-augmented question-answering system stores documents and
their metadata (records), models who-answered-what or what-cites-what (relationships), and

> retrieves passages by semantic similarity (vectors). A bioinformatics or recommender pipeline
> has the same character. Python is the lingua franca for all of it, but no single
> Python-embeddable data store covers all three access patterns. The usual response is to
> assemble a stack: SQLite or DuckDB for records, NetworkX or a graph database for
> relationships, and a vector index such as FAISS, hnswlib, or Chroma for embeddings
> [@duckdb2019; @sqlite; @networkx2008; @faiss2019; @hnswlib; @chroma].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
retrieves passages by semantic similarity (vectors). Python is popular for these workloads, but no single
Python-embeddable data store covers all three access patterns. The usual response is to
assemble a stack: SQLite or DuckDB for records, NetworkX or a graph database for
relationships, and a vector index such as FAISS, hnswlib, or Chroma for embeddings
[@duckdb2019; @sqlite; @networkx2008; @faiss2019; @hnswlib; @chroma].
```

Proposing some simplifications:

* remove the sentence about bioinformatics... it does not add any information
* replace the phrase "lingua franca" with simpler, more direct language

Assembling specialists is a reasonable default, and for many projects the right one. But its
costs fall hardest on the local, exploratory, reproducibility-sensitive work that
characterizes scientific Python. Data must be copied and kept in sync across systems with
different consistency models. Joining a graph traversal to a vector neighborhood means moving

> identifiers between processes by hand. Reproducing an experiment means standing up and pinning

Reviewer: The claims in this paragraph read as pretty exaggerated, to the point that I think it distracts from the content of the paper.

For example, the idea that using DuckDB for SQL and `networkx` for graph data is equivalent to doing data processing "by hand" is not really true or fair, in my opinion.

> several services instead of installing one package. None of that is fundamental to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
several services instead of installing one package.
```

I'd remove this sentence, it doesn't add any information to the paper. The introduction already used the words "science" / "scientific" to try to orient this towards SciPy, the paper doesn't need continued generic "and you can use this for science" types of phrases.

science.

This paper explores the alternative: an embedded *multi-model* database reachable from Python
in-process, with one engine, one file-backed database and one transaction over documents, a
property graph and vector indexes. The engine is ArcadeDB [@arcadedb], a mature Apache-2.0
Java engine that keeps all three models over one set of records. Documents are queried with
its SQL dialect, the graph with OpenCypher, and vectors through an HNSW index. Workload type
is a separate axis: transactional (OLTP) and analytical (OLAP) queries run over the same data.
ArcadeDB is ACID, and recent versions add Graph Analytical Views (GAV) that accelerate graph
analytics without giving up transactional guarantees.

The engine, however, is Java. Our contribution is what makes it usable in-process from scientific Python.
**`arcadedb-embedded`** is a binding built on JPype [@jpype; @arcadedbpython]. It runs the
engine inside the Python process over a *bundled* per-platform Java runtime, exposes a
NumPy/pandas-friendly API, and ships as ordinary wheels (`pip install arcadedb-embedded`, no

> Java installation, no server). The focus throughout is enablement. We do not claim the engine is fastest at any one task, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Java installation, no server). We do not claim the engine is fastest at any one task, and
```

This seems like as good a place as any to leave this comment... filler statements like this one I'm recommending removing are strong evidence that a significant portion of the text was generated by an LLM.

I see you added an AI use disclosure that says you used AI tools to help with this paper, and that is allowed under the proceedings' AI use policy (https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/blob/2026/genai_policy.md). But from this point forward I think the paper would really benefit from your making remaining edits manually and from you doing a copy-editing pass for reducing the "AI voice" in the paper. I'm only a few paragraphs in and I've already found it pretty distracting (personal context: I am exhausted from reading AI-generated text at work and in open source every day), and I suspect other readers might as well.

I'll avoid leaving more comments about this specific thing in this first round of review. I hope you'll consider this editing pass.

we show where it is not. We claim that documents, graph and vectors *in one Python process*
remove the boundaries that fragment these workflows.

Concretely, this paper contributes:

> 1. **An in-process multi-model database for Python.** We describe the binding design: an in-process JVM via JPype, transaction and lifecycle

Reviewer: `JPype` should be a citation, please: https://www.osti.gov/doecode/biblio/46107

management, and NumPy/pandas interop. Platform-agnostic Java bytecode plus a per-platform
bundled JRE yields wheels for four platforms × five Python versions, installable with no Java
present.
2. **A hybrid in-process workflow as the central demonstration.** A single retrieval pipeline
   composes vector search → SQL filtering → graph traversal over one dataset in one process
   and one transaction. We argue, with a capability matrix, that no single Python-embeddable
   alternative expresses this composition, and that the binding is what makes it possible from
   Python at all.

> 3. **An honest characterization of the embedded-from-Python experience.** A matched, resource-capped, reproducible benchmark suite compares the engine (*as reached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **An honest characterization of the embedded-from-Python experience.** A reproducible benchmark suite compares the engine (*as reached
```

I think it's sufficient just to say "reproducible" here, I'm not sure what "matched" means and "resource-capped" is an implementation detail of the benchmark that doesn't belong in this high-level summary.

not the engine's internals or algorithms.

## Background and Related Approaches

**Embedded data stores in Python.** The embedded database is a familiar shape in this community: it runs in the host process, persists to ordinary files, and needs no
server. SQLite is the archetype for records and transactions [@sqlite]. DuckDB brought a
columnar, analytics-first embedded engine to Python and is now widely used for in-process
analytical SQL [@duckdb2019]. For relationships, NetworkX [@networkx2008] provides in-memory
graph analysis, while LadybugDB [@ladybugdb], the maintained continuation of the Kùzu project
[@kuzu2023], is an embedded, analytics-oriented *graph database* with a Cypher interface and
vector indexing.
For vectors, hnswlib provides the reference HNSW implementation
[@hnsw2018; @hnswlib], FAISS provides exact and approximate similarity search [@faiss2019],
and Chroma packages HNSW behind a convenient Python API [@chroma]. Each is excellent within
its model. What none provides is *all three models in one embedded engine*. SQLite has no
graph or vector type, DuckDB has no transactional graph or Cypher, LadybugDB is graph-first

> (graph and vectors, but no document/SQL OLTP store), and Chroma is vector-only.

Reviewer: The parallel structure in this sentence is not consistent

```
SQLite has no {thing}
DuckDB has no {thing}
LadybugDB is graph-first (graph and vectors, but no {thing})
Chroma is vector-only
```

That change of format raises the effort for readers to understand the differences (I know I had to slow down and think hard about what this was saying).

I think this would be more easily understood as a feature matrix table, would you consider that instead?

**The composable-stack counterpoint.** A natural objection is that you do not need one engine.
You compose specialists. @datta2025composable articulates this "Python is all you need"
position: a composable, Python-native data stack assembled from best-of-breed components. We

> take that argument seriously, and for warehouse-scale and team settings it is compelling. Our

Reviewer: > _for warehouse-scale and team settings it is compelling_

I think there are 2 overlapping topics being discussed throughout the paper (at least up to this point):

* in-process databases vs. services you communicate with over a network
* combining Python libraries specialized to each of 3 different query patterns vs. this `arcadedb-embedded` 

I recommend devoting a paragraph to the decision to use in-process datastores vs. server-based datastores, and for the rest of the paper only compare `arcadedb-embeded` to those other in-process options. That'd simplify things and make the comparisons a bit sharper, in my opinion.

we adopt the lightweight, comparative style of recent SciPy tool papers
[@alted2023blosc2; @sahara2025dft], with a few matched tables rather than an exhaustive
bake-off.

## Architecture: An Embedded Java Engine with Python Bindings

`arcadedb-embedded` runs the ArcadeDB engine *inside* the Python interpreter process. There
is no socket, no server lifecycle, and no separate process to manage. Opening a database is a
function call, and queries are method calls that return Python objects.

**In-process JVM via JPype.** On first use, the binding starts an embedded JVM inside the
Python process using JPype [@jpype], which bridges CPython and the JVM in a single address
space and lets Python call Java methods directly. The engine's Java objects are exposed
through a thin Pythonic facade, so application code never touches JPype directly. Because the
JVM is in-process, there is no inter-process serialization on the query path: result rows
cross the in-process boundary, not a network socket. The JVM is configured from Python via a
keyword argument at database creation, notably the heap size, which matters for large vector

> indexes (discussed later):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On first use, the binding starts an embedded JVM inside the Python process using JPype [@jpype].
JVM settings like heap size are configured directly from Python, and CPython and the JVM
share a single address space, so data can be passed around without needing network calls or
inter-process serialization. The engine's Java objects are exposed through a Pythonic layer,
so applications never need to interact with JPype directly.
```

What does "in-process boundary" mean?

Would you consider something like this proposed re-write? I think it's significantly simpler and more direct.

    with db.transaction():
        db.command("sql", "INSERT INTO Post SET id = :id, score = :s",
                   {"id": 1, "s": 42})
    rows = db.query("sql", "SELECT id, score FROM Post WHERE id = 1").to_list()
```

**One handle for all three models.** The same `db` object reaches documents (SQL), the property
graph (OpenCypher), and vectors (an HNSW index, searched with the `vectorNeighbors` function).
The query method's first argument selects the query language, so every model is reached through
one connection, one transaction scope, and one set of identifiers. Workload type is orthogonal:
the same query can be a transactional point operation (OLTP) or an analytical scan (OLAP). This
single-handle design is what later lets a hybrid workflow thread results from one model directly
into the next without leaving the process.

**NumPy and pandas.** Scientific Python speaks arrays and frames, and the binding fits in.
Embeddings are passed as `float32` NumPy arrays through a helper,
`arcadedb.to_java_float_array(vec)`, that hands the buffer to the engine without a Python-side
element-by-element copy; this is the path the vector and hybrid workloads use. Query results

> come back as ordinary lists of dict-like rows that drop straight into a `pandas.DataFrame`, and
> our workflows use pandas to load and prepare the source data. Bulk graph construction is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
come back as ordinary lists of dict-like rows that drop straight into a `pandas.DataFrame`. Bulk graph construction is
```

This clause beginning with "and our workflows" seems out of place in this paragraph... was it maybe included from some other work related to ArcadeDB?

available through a `graph_batch` context manager that amortizes edge creation. Together these

> keep the engine feeling native to a NumPy/pandas workflow rather than like a foreign service.

Reviewer: This paragraph is making a claim about how the API of `arcadedb-embedded` naturally fits with `numpy` / `pandas` codes... show us some code, please. Directly showing some code would make these easier to understand and might allow the description to be simplified.

For bulk results the binding also exposes columnar exports, and the choice between them is
about types rather than speed. `to_columns()` returns NumPy arrays, which fits until a column contains nulls. NumPy has no
missing value for integers, so a nullable `INTEGER` must widen to `float64` with `NaN` holes.
That loses the type and any precision above $2^{53}$, and a nullable boolean degrades to a
Python list. `to_arrow()` reads the same buffer
into a `pyarrow.Table`, keeping the validity bitmap the buffer already carries, so those
columns stay `int64` and `bool`. It is not a second serialization path. The columnar transport already emits packed columns
with a null bitmap, and Arrow's string layout is the same offsets-plus-blob representation. So

> the export adds no Java and no bytes to the wheel, and pyarrow is an optional extra.

Reviewer: I understand all the individual words in this paragraph but I'm not confident that I understand the paragraph itself.

I *think* the purpose here is to say:

* "the library can populate query results directly into `numpy` and `pyarrow` data structures"

and 

* "... but `numpy` and `pyarrow` are not required dependencies"

Is it roughly that? If so that's interesting and valuable, but I think the paragraph needs a full re-write for clarity.

and it turns out to matter more than any engine-level difference this paper reports. We
return to it with numbers in [](#sec-transport).

**Cross-platform packaging: the bundled-JRE wheel.** Distribution is an easily overlooked but
important part of the contribution. Java bytecode is platform-agnostic, so the
engine's `.jar` files are identical everywhere. The only platform-specific dependency is the
Java runtime itself. `arcadedb-embedded` therefore *bundles a per-platform JRE* inside the
wheel: the build produces wheels for four platforms (Linux x86-64, Linux ARM64, macOS Apple
Silicon, and Windows x86-64), each carrying the matching JRE, across Python 3.10–3.14, for
twenty wheels in total. The user runs `pip install arcadedb-embedded` and gets a working
multi-model database with **no Java installation and no `JAVA_HOME`**, and with no server to
deploy or operate. The JVM is an implementation detail sealed inside the package
([](#fig-arch)). The cost is wheel size, about 67 MB per wheel (Linux x86-64; the other
platforms are within a few MB), dominated by the runtime. We keep it small by trimming the JRE

> with `jlink` to only the modules the engine needs and by excluding JARs the engine does not

Reviewer: This needs a citation. I'm unsure what the best resource is, maybe https://openjdk.org/jeps/282 ?

require. That is the price of "no Java to install," paid once at install time.

About 8 MB of the wheel is an optional in-process HTTP server with a web UI, inert unless the
program calls `create_server()`. It is 12 JARs totalling 7.65 MB, plus 0.8 MB of JRE modules
`jlink` pulls in only for them. It costs about 10 ms of one-time JVM startup for the longer
classpath, and nothing measurable in resident memory. The wheels benchmarked here were built without it and

> are about 62 MB; embedded behaviour is identical either way.

Reviewer: I was very confused by this paragraph. I found it to be way over-specific in some places and lacking in critical information in otherp laces.

My biggest concern is that it seems to be saying "the wheels published to PyPI contain some optional components which affect startup time, but later in the paper I show benchmarks based on some custom build that doesn't have those components".

This paragraph left me as a reader wondering about some important questions:

* "well if you're presenting benchmarks from a custom build, what performance should I expect in my application where I `pip install arcadedb-embedded` and get a different build?"
* "what is the real-world purpose of `create_server()`? Why would I ever call it? Also haven't you been saying throughout this paper that not needing any servers or network calls is a defining benefit of this project?"

And instead of listing out the exact number of JARs and the compressed size to the nearest 10kb (details readers do not need), I recommend reframing these things in terms of the user benefit, for example "wheels are around 70 MB compressed, larger than projects like NumPy but not so large that they'd be prohibitively expensive to download over a weak internet connection or use in a space-constrained application like AWS Lambda".

accelerates the Cypher traversal (measured at 2.4× on the analytical suite, see below). The
same traversal through ArcadeDB's native SQL `MATCH` surface answers in ≈3 ms. Both surfaces
run the same traversal over the same storage, within about 2× of each other, and neither is a
translation layer bolted onto the other. Preparing this workflow surfaced two engine issues, both reported upstream and both fixed
within days. A Cypher planner gap made this traversal ≈143 ms. A vector-index maintenance bug
inflated the vector step to ≈100 ms and the bulk load by ≈45×. Both are instances of the
release cadence noted at the end of the benchmark section. All of it runs in a single process
after a one-time bulk load. The
three steps pass 200 vector candidates to the SQL filter, 50 survivors to the graph traversal,
and return the top 10 answers. Timings were measured on the same host and 8-core cap as the
comparison tables below.

What makes this a *contribution*, not merely a convenience, is that no single
Python-embeddable alternative can express it. [](#tbl-capability) lays out the capability

> matrix. SQLite has no graph or vector model, DuckDB has no transactional graph or Cypher,

Reviewer: This "{database1} has {x} but not {y}, {database2} has {y} but not {z}, etc." paragraph was already included earlier in the paper (https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/1256/changes#r3788607186)

The restatement here is not adding new information. I think one of them should be removed or converted to a reference to the other.

choice, and what does it cost?* It is deliberately not a database bake-off. We compare
ArcadeDB, *as reached from Python*, against the strongest
Python-embeddable specialist in each lane: SQLite and DuckDB (tabular), LadybugDB (graph), and
Chroma (vector).

**Protocol.** Each (lane, backend, workload) cell runs in its own pinned Docker container, one
at a time, restricted to 8 CPU cores (`--cpuset-cpus 0-7`) and a memory cap, repeated 5 times.
Engines run their shipped defaults except where stated: SQLite is configured WAL +
`synchronous=NORMAL` (its documented recommendation; the durability implications are stated
with the tabular results), and ArcadeDB's JVM heap is pinned per tier.
We report the median with the full [min–max] range: database benchmark repetitions are
right-skewed (GC pauses, page-cache state), so the median resists outliers while the range
exposes them, following established guidance for performance reporting
[@raasveldt2018fair; @hoefler2015scientific]. A host-side sidecar samples each container's cgroup memory
and CPU and reads the kernel peak. The data is the **Cross Validated** (`stats.stackexchange.com`)

> public data dump [@crossvalidated], a statistics and machine-learning Q&A corpus and the most
> SciPy-relevant Stack Exchange site, comprising 425,735 posts, 345,754 users, and 1,242,391

Reviewer: ```suggestion
public data dump [@crossvalidated], a statistics and machine-learning Q&A corpus, comprising 425,735 posts, 345,754 users, and 1,242,391
```

Remove "and the most SciPy-relevant Stack Exchange site". You can't substantiate that claim, and it's a distraction from the purpose of the paper.
